The world model for me is a model that can
understand the state of the world and predict
how it's going to change, given an action
you put into it.
So, mathematically speaking, it's a function
that takes your current state, your current
action, and predicts the next state.
Essentially a simulator.
It's a model that can allow you to understand
how the world will evolve, given different
things you might want to do or interact with
that world.
The result of this is a world model that can
simulate the future and, if you want to, you
can take that state and decode it back to
video so you can produce the video output
of what's actually going to happen.
But you might not want to.
If you want to keep this real time and efficient,
you can just stay in your embedding space
and use it to drive your car.
Hi, I wanted to jump in and give a shout out
to our sponsor, netsuite by Oracle.
I'm a journalist and getting a single source
of truth is nearly impossible.
If you're a business owner, having a single
source of truth is critical to running your
operations.
If this is you, you should know these three
numbers 36,000, 25, 1.
36,000 because that's the number of businesses
that have upgraded to NetSuite by Oracle.
Netsuite is the number one cloud financial
system streamlining accounting, financial
management, inventory, hr.
And more.
25 because NetSuite turns 25 this year.
That's 25 years of helping businesses do more
with less, close their books in days, not
weeks, and drive down costs.
One because your business is one of a kind,
so you get a customized solution for all of
your KPIs in one efficient system with one
source of truth.
Change risk, get reliable, forecast and improve
margins Everything you need all in one place.
As I said, I'm not the most organized person
in the world, and there's real power to having
all of the information in one place to make
better decisions.
This is an unprecedented offer by NetSuite
to make that possible Right now.
Download NetSuite's popular KPI checklist,
designed to give you consistently excellent
performance, absolutely free at netsuite.com.
That's I on AI, e-y-e-o-n-a-i all run together.
Go to netsuitecom I on AI to get your own
KPI checklist.
They support us, so let's support them.
I'm Craig Smith and this is I on AI.
This week, I spoke with Alex Kendall, CEO
of Wave AI, to understand Wave's innovative
approach to autonomous vehicles using a world
model called Gaia 1.
Alex explains the advantages of world models,
which we've explored before on this podcast
with Jan LeCun, and how they can be used in
AI agents.
The discussion offers a unique view on the
progress, promise and obstacles in developing
AI to act in the physical world.
I hope you find the conversation as fascinating
as I did.
I'm an engineer at heart.
I've loved building things ever since I was
growing up and did so in the back garden,
but got the chance to work on a bunch of robotics
in my childhood in New Zealand.
Whether it's building drones to chase some
sheep around the field that I grew up in,
or other projects I did at university, One
way or another they ended up taking me to
the University of Cambridge.
I spent many years there doing a PhD in research
fellowship in computer vision.
I'm fortunate enough to publish some of the
first work that applied deep learning to scene
understanding algorithms like semantic segmentation,
depth motion, and other forms of scene understanding.
I think that work really inspired some of
the ideas that I've had to be able to build
machines that can make decisions for themselves.
Interestingly enough, a lot of my PhD work
stops short of understanding the future or
doing future prediction, which is, I think,
one of the big topics we've been able to address
with world models and Gaia, which I'm looking
forward to talking about.
Yeah Well, that's fascinating.
As I said, I just had Yann Lecun on the podcast
talking about world models.
He mentioned Gaia.
Where do I start?
I'm interested in world models as an alternative
to large language models.
Gaia won, your model.
Yan says it's a little different from his
JEPA architecture that he's using to research
world models.
Can you tell us a little bit about Gaia winning?
Then I have a lot of questions.
I'm interested in marrying this tech with
robotics, because the big challenge in robotics,
beyond the hardware, is building an AI brain
that can plan and make decisions and that
sort of thing.
There's a lot of talk right now about LLMs
being able to play that role, but I also think
there are a lot of problems because of the
hallucinations or the fact that large language
models don't have a very concrete underlying
model of the world.
Why don't you talk about Gaia, how that came
about, what it is both generally, and then
how it's built and will go from there?
Well, taking a step back, maybe some background.
So I lead Wave, an autonomous driving company,
and how? we've set off on a different path
to build autonomous driving systems that have
the onboard intelligence to drive different
vehicles in new places, including places they
haven't been to before, and understand the
complexity and the long tail of situations
that you see on our roads.
And this is a, you know, taking an AI approach
to autonomous driving is, you know, quite
contrarian and different to how people usually
look at this problem.
When we started six years ago, in 2017, we
set off to build an end-to-end neural net
that could learn to drive.
You know, take the data as input and output,
emotion plan to control a vehicle.
And this end-to-end AI approach I guess you
know why a world model is interesting here.
So, for me, it is a model that can understand
the state of the world and predict how it's
going to change, given an action that you
know you put into it.
So, mathematically speaking, it's a function
that takes your current state, your current
action, and predicts the next state.
So it's essentially a simulator.
It's a model that can allow you to understand
how the world will evolve, given different
things you might want to do or interact with
that world.
Why is this important for self-driving?
Well, the first thing you might look at when
you're building an end-to-end neural network.
To drive a car is to build something that's
autoregressive.
Build something that creates a function that
takes your input state and produces the motion
plan that you should drive with.
And that's kind of what people did in large
language models.
And the problem with self-driving is it's
a safety-critical application.
If you make the wrong decision, you're not
just going to put out some hallucinated text,
but you know it's life and death decisions
of driving on our roads.
So for that reason, it's really important
that you are aware of the implication of your
decision and you can understand the dynamics
of the world.
So that's really what motivated us to start
off with world models as a concept, and in
2018, we actually published a blog with one
of the first examples of doing this On an
autonomous vehicle.
We published a model-based reinforcement learning
system where actually we're only on a quiet
country road, but we learned to drive a car
with a world model.
So this system had never driven an actual
car, it only learned in its imagination in
a world model.
But it used this model that had trained of
the dynamics of the world to be able to learn
to operate this car and drive it down a quiet
country road and I guess over the last six
years I can talk more about Gaia, but over
the last six years we have scaled that approach
to the point it is today where, with the latest
and greatest in generative AI, we can now
understand the full, diverse, rich, dynamic
urban scenes that we operate in today, like
Central London.
In building the world model.
I mean, the autonomous driving systems to
date are helping me out here, but they're
primarily reinforcement learning systems that
are taking in data from various sensors and
have trained on what the best approach is
in any particular situation.
Is that right, or what is the current state
of autonomous driving systems?
Well, we're having an AI conversation and,
fundamentally, autonomous driving is a high
problem.
It's a problem of complex, high-dimensional
decision-making, and so you'd assume that
you're going to use a data-driven method like
reinforcement learning to do it, but actually
that's not the case.
If you look at all of the large autonomous
driving efforts out there today, outside of
Wave, primarily the approach is a traditional
robotics one.
It's one of, yes, you use deep learning for
perception, but once you have the state of
the world, it's very much a hand-coded optimization
approach to produce a motion plan that's aided
by a set of infrastructure like HD map high-definition
maps that tell the car where and how to behave.
So it's actually not an AI approach, and what
we've done is, I think, the first time an
AI system has actually driven on the roads
at this level of scale, so that's not how
the industry has traditionally approached
things.
When you bring in an AI approach, of course,
the challenges there are how do you understand
what it's doing, how do you make sure it's
safe and making the right decisions, and so
that's brought up some of these challenges
that led us down the road of world models.
So well, that's interesting.
I didn't know that about autonomous driving
systems.
So there they have all these sensors, that
data is coming into a central decision maker,
and you're saying that decision maker is a
traditional control system and not a probabilistic
AI system.
Probably speaking, yes.
A lot of the systems running around in San
Francisco today, for example, are of that
approach.
Now, more and more machine learning has been
used throughout over year on year in these
systems.
But it's not an end-to-end neural net, it's
not a large transformer that decides the whole
decision making, and that's the step that
we've taken to replace that entire stack with
one big neural network that learns how to
drive end-to-end.
And I've seen a lot written recently about
using the reasoning power of large language
models to play that role, to decide on actions,
and then with some other piece of software,
to translate that action, to execute on that
plan.
And can you talk about, well, first of all,
for Gaia, the world model.
So there's a world model that's building a
state of the world in its I guess its weights,
and then a reinforcement learning model that
learns to act on those on that state of the
world.
Is that right?
Maybe you can describe the architecture a
little bit.
Yeah.
Let me jump into some of those details.
We've got our research paper online that talks
about them in great depth.
But one of the interesting things for me is
that if you look at the three big major trends
that we've seen in large language models this
year I mean at the start of the year it was
all about scale.
Everyone was talking about how many parameters,
how much data, how much compute are these
models trained on.
In the middle of the year, it became about
multimodality.
We pushed scale to some degree and now it's
about how do we understand across different
modes, and a lot of image tech systems came
out, for example.
And then, more recently, it's about synthetic
data.
The benefits of synthetic data are clear:
you can control the bias in your training
data, you can ensure that the training data
is equally sampled across the things you care
about, or you can control the distribution
of your training data, and you can often get
information that is harder to understand from
noisy real data alone.
And those three trends that have really driven
the state of the art and say large language
models.
The interesting thing is we've seen the exact
same thing play out in robotics.
So for us at Wave, we've been pushing the
scale of our neural network that drives the
car, and in the next year our roadmap is going
to be pushing this in terms of parameters,
data and compute by 100x further, two orders
of magnitude further, and so the results,
the emergent behavior we're seeing, come out
as just remarkable.
We believe the car to nudge its way through
crowds of pedestrians, to do complicated,
unprotected turns, to predict the behavior
of other agents cutting in or moving around
our vehicle.
All of this kind of thing emerges at that
level of scale.
The second trend on multi-modality that's
where I think it's really important to be
able to learn to understand between different
modes, because ultimately, if you're training
a self-driving car just off the video data
it has, it's going to be intelligent, but
perhaps it will be more intelligent if it
doesn't only have that video data but also
text and other information sources it has
when you and I learned to drive.
I learned to drive when I was 16.
And maybe my mom and dad probably had 20 or
30 hours in the car with me, maybe not that
long.
Maybe I learned something like five or 10
hours, I think.
I was a fast learner but that kind of lengthened
time to learn how to drive.
But it wasn't just that that allowed me to
drive.
It was probably the 15 or 16 years of experience
I'd had of learning how the world works, learning
what objects are, how things might behave
on the roads, and it was that observation
that gave me the intelligence to drive, I
think that's seeing the same as true in robotics.
We can train our autonomous driving system
now, not just on the video data of a driver
but also internet video and text.
We can literally feed it the PDF document
of the highway road code that the government
writes and give it that as further context
to understand.
And so I think multimodality is becoming really
important to bring together different sources
of information and improve the intelligence
of your system.
But then, secondly, with text specifically,
I think the future of how we interact with
robots is going to be through language.
We are going to be talking to our robots,
interacting with them.
There's a reason why you and I have evolved
languages.
The way we communicate is because it's the
most efficient way to get information across
that we understand, and so, for that reason,
maybe not most efficient, but most natural
way, and so, for that reason, I think the
accessibility of robotics will be greatly
improved by us being able to just literally
conversely, you should be able to be in your
self-driving car and say take the next left,
take the next right, drop me off here or I'm
worried about this.
Why are you doing that?
And you should be able to build a sense of
trust through it.
And we've done exactly that at Wave.
We've produced a system called Lingo, which
is a first, a vision, language, action foundation
model that combines those modalities of video,
of action and robotics and language that allows
us to talk to our autonomous vehicle and ask
it why and what it's doing.
And then, finally, the third trend, on synthetic
data.
This is where Gaia comes in.
Gaia is our world model.
Not only is it a system that allows AI to
understand the implications of the decisions
it's making, but also produces synthetic data.
Generative AI is very good at recombining
data in new ways, and so we have lots of experiences
of foggy scenes on the car.
We have lots of experiences of jaywalking
scenarios, but we have very few foggy jaywalking
scenarios.
And Gaia can not only allow us to understand
how the world's going to evolve, but it can
create new examples we haven't seen before.
And again, we can do that by connecting vision,
language and action.
We can prompt it and say, literally, give
it a prompt and say I want an example of a
jaywalking pedestrian in the fog.
Or we can take a scene that exists in the
real world and change it and ask it to recreate
it with new features and things like that.
I don't really get into the architecture of
Gaia and I'm happy to, but I just thought
those three trends have been really powerful
for us in AI and exactly applicable to robotics
as well.
Yeah, so you can tell from my questioning.
I'm a journalist, not a practitioner, so my
knowledge is fairly surface.
But I understand large language models to
a degree.
I understand the transformer algorithm and
the large language models are predicting the
next token in a sequence and because of the
volume of training data it does a very credible
job most of the time.
I understand Jens' JEPA architecture, the
Joint Embedding Predictive Architecture, to
a degree.
He says your model is something different,
so can you kind of walk us through it at a
very high level of how the model is trained
and what it's doing?
It's predicting the next state of the world,
whether it's video or text or whatever.
Is it doing that with a transformer algorithm?
How is it doing it?
I'm just sure the audience would also like
to hear.
Absolutely so.
I mean Jan and I share a lot of common beliefs
around these systems.
We think that to go beyond the autoregressive
nature of large language models, of just predicting
the next word, and getting to systems that
can understand and be safety critical, we
need to have world models.
We share the vision that these should be unsupervised.
They should be able to be trained through
self supervision, through whether it signals
contrast of learning or building energy spaces
or things like this.
I think we share a lot in common there.
I mean, jepa is a great architectural approach.
I think there's a lot in common in these systems
in terms of there's some representation space.
You want to train it with unsupervised learning,
and so for our approach, in particular with
Gaia, what we first do is we tokenize up the
different inputs, whether it's images, action
or language, and essentially, well, today
it's a large transformer, but you could use
whatever your favorite flavor of neural network
or, let's say, machine learning system that
you want to use, but essentially you take
those inputs and you learn this dynamics,
this ability to take current state, current
action and predict next state, and then the
result of this is a world model that can simulate
the future and, if you want to, you can take
that state and decode it back to video so
you can produce the video output of what's
actually going to happen.
But you might not want to.
If you want to keep this real, time and efficient,
you can just stay in your embedding space
and use it to drive your car, and right now
we're working on Gaia 2 and Gaia Drive, and
these are systems that very much are going
to see Gaia embedded in the vehicle, able
to actually increase the intelligence, understanding
and improve the safety criticality of our
system in a production setting.
So that's really the guts of the architecture
Today it's a transformer that's able to predict
future states.
And again, forgive me, I'm sure you'll cringe
at my repeating this back to you in sort of
super layman's language but you're encoding
the data coming in or tokenizing it and turning
it into embeddings in.
I guess you call it a feature space or embedding
dimension, and you're making predictions based
on that at that level.
So there and then to see the video, you decode
it into pixels but in that space you can predict
the.
Is it?
How specific are those representations?
When I said embedding space, I guess I meant
representation space.
Yeah, One of the other big challenges of self-driving,
compared to large language models, is the
amount of data you have as input is enormous.
I mean, take our latest vehicle, for example.
It's six or seven cameras.
They have eight megapixels each, and then
you care about multiple frames over time and
not to mention, like if you consider an imaging
radar as well or choose the sensors you want
to use, just in cameras alone, the data eight
megapixels, your RGB values there, so 24 million
bytes alone from those.
Multiply that by the six cameras, then you've
got about 120 million bytes, and then multiply
that by multiple time frames.
I mean you're talking about gigabytes of data
there alone.
And that data what it does is it makes it
you can't have an embedding space for your
dealing with gigabytes of data.
It's just too much to process, and so to make
these models practical, you need to be able
to take that extraordinary amount of input,
data, all those videos, and compress them
into an embedding space that you can reason
about.
So I guess the question is how many factors
do you think you care about for a driving
scene?
You can list them out.
You care about the positions of the cars in
front of you, the pedestrians, the cyclists,
the direction they're facing, the way they're
going to move, the weather conditions, the
traffic light, all these kinds of factors.
Now, interestingly, if you go down the path
of trying to list them out by hand, you end
up in the AV 1.0, the classical robotics approach
to autonomy, and that doesn't scale because
it's very hard to enumerate all those factors
and to reason about them a priori.
So we can do it as a thought exercise, but
I wouldn't advocate for that approach.
But the point is that it's not hundreds and
millions of numbers.
There's probably a much smaller set of things
that you care about there, and so we want
to learn that you don't care about the pixels
in the sky, except you want to know the weather,
but you don't really care about all those
things.
There's a lot of redundant information in
this signal.
Compare that to large language models.
You have sentences of text that are really
high signal to noise ratio.
Text is precise at saying this means that
and impacts this right.
It's a direct description of what you care
about, compared to videos where most of the
pixels in an image you don't care about are
Clouds.
Second story of a building you don't care
about when you're driving.
So the point is that you want to take this
data and embed it in a very efficient space,
and the way we do that is through end to end
learning about what do we care about for driving,
what actually is going to impact how the world's
going to evolve, and that's what we look to
learn.
So we look to build a transformer and a self
supervised learning approach that learns and
embedding, that is really efficient, is as
small and compressed as possible, but has
the information that we need to understand
the safety critical natures of the scenarios
that we're driving through.
So that's the primary task of that embedding
model and that learning model of the scene
representation.
Yeah, and then, right now that you know I've
seen some remarkable videos that you've done
and maybe I can, you know, splice one into
this podcast.
But they're awesome when you drive the car.
I go out most weeks and when you see it learn
new behaviors week on week, like just yesterday
I was when I went for a drive down a part
of London and Notting Hill and we went through
Portobello Road Market.
It's this crazy area with loads of pedestrians
all on the road.
I've never seen our car sort of nudge its
way through a crowd of pedestrians but it
did so really safely, in a way that you know
if you just stopped and waited for the pedestrians
to clear, you'd be stuck there for an hour.
So I have these kinds of new behaviors over
time.
There's tons of videos that we have online
of this stuff, but it's pretty amazing seeing
AI operate in the physical world like this.
Yeah, the videos.
So you're then decoding the representation
space into pixels in a video.
That's useful, I presume, for creating training
data.
But when you're actually driving in real time,
how is that state of the world being translated
into action?
And that's where I think you said there's
an RL engine or agent that's learning over
time how to act on that.
Can you talk about that part?
Yeah, absolutely.
I mean, one of the amazing things about Gaia
properties is that you can create photorealistic
and diverse scenes that are controllable by
text.
You can modify these environments and you
can also create multimodal futures.
I think the really powerful thing is when
you only observe the past, you know you can't
predict how the future is going to unfold
in a driving scene, and the fact that Gaia
can generate diverse, multimodal, plausible
futures is a really important factor.
But, yeah, in order to actually control the
car.
So this is what we call Gaia Drive.
It's not just decoding to images, but also
well, there's many ways that you can go about
thinking about incorporating Gaia into a driving
system.
For example, you could generate future data
and use that synthetic data to actually just
train a system.
You could use it to predict the future and
use the information it learns about predicting
the future to improve the driving representation.
Or you could actually bring it into full on.
You know, model based reinforcement learning
or model predictive control or some kind of
learning simulator.
What that means is that, let's say you're
driving, you're at a green light and you want
to decide whether you drive through the intersection.
What the system can do is it can run its world
on a run Gaia for a few seconds ahead and
see what might happen.
Maybe it runs it a few times and sees how
various different things happen and then it
can make a decision based on how it thinks
the future is going to play out.
We do that in our brains and in our hippocampus
we have mechanisms that are, you know, most
famously referred to as sort of thinking fast
and thinking slow.
Thinking fast, the reactive decision making
you don't really plan ahead, you just do,
whereas thinking slowly you take a step back
and use a reason for what might happen.
Should I do this?
And you sort of play chess.
A few steps forward and we can do the same
thing in robotics.
Robotics has typically had, you know, two
levels of control.
There's a low level control that runs over
100 times a second that controls parts of
a robot, and you have a high level control
that operates typically around 10 times a
second.
That is the high level reasoning.
But actually what these kinds of models that
you do is maybe move one more level up, abstract
and have a three tiered system.
You can have a thinking slow thing which can
involve a large language model to interact
and to reason and to plan could involve a
world model to actually understand the implications
of these decisions.
And that might happen at anything from one
hertz, you know, one time a second to maybe
even one time every 10 seconds.
It's quite an infrequent high level.
If you think about when you're driving, that
sort of high level kind of topological task
planning you do can happen at the highest
level.
Then that middle tier, you know you're designing
the motion plan that you want to follow to
ensure you don't hit things that you follow
problems.
That's more reactive and it runs it at that
kind of 10 times a second and the 100 times
a second is sort of the minute changes and
breaks and steering to make sure that you
actually achieve that plan that you've set
up.
And that three tier system I think is as I
think world models can play a really great
role in that top one a new level of higher
level reasoning into robotics.
And the advantages of that over agents built
purely off of large language models is that
they're there.
They require less computation, I would imagine,
but also
their decisions or their predictions are grounded
more firmly in reality, where, as a large
language model, even if it's tokenizing pixels
in a video, it's only predicting one token
ahead as it goes along.
Is that right?
Yeah, look, I think large language models
and world models can be complimentary, right.
Like large language models give you the ability
to understand well, give you a text interface.
They really interact through language, but
they give you the ability to learn a really
incredible understanding of the world through
internet scale text and world models.
The advantages of world models is they give
you the ability to understand the implication
of your decision.
Whether you are making a driving task decision,
whether you are outputting sentences and text,
you know.
Whatever it may be, it allows you to understand,
okay, what is the implication of that decision
and the environment I'm operating in.
Is that a good thing or not?
And that understanding can help you do things
in a safety critical environment.
So I think world models become really important
in an application like self driving, maybe
not so much like an internet search problem,
but when you have safety critical applications
whether that's in medical correspondence,
of language models or self driving for our
application that's when world models give
you the ability to do that.
The other advantage I described, though, is
not just at runtime, but also at training
time.
World models give you the ability to learn
more efficiently.
We do this in our brains as well as people.
We daydream or nightdream.
When we dream, we actually go through a process
that solidifies our actions and lets us replay
experiences to learn to do them better next
time.
Yeah, like if you're learning to play tennis
and you hit a ball once you know you're not
going to hit a ball with every single permutation
of the angle that your racket might be, to
learn how it might go.
You might only hit it a few times, but from
that you need to learn the general way of
how to hit a ball, to get it in the right
part of the court to be able to play tennis
and what we do is from the ways that we hit
the ball.
We actually, you know, replay this in our
internal world model many times when we daydream
to be able to learn how to do that more effectively.
And the same is true with machine learning.
When you have a world model, you can get more
out of your training data.
You can replay, recombine, reconfigure and
use that to understand your training data
and learn a much more performant, effective
or safe policy or decision making system from
your training data because of the fact that
you can learn and recombine those experiences
in new ways.
So world models are really powerful with training
and inference or testing time.
So and you're, you have this system, not only
creating training data, but acting as an agent
to drive a car.
How many, how developed is that system?
How far is it from commercialization, for
example, how many cars do you have it in and
how many road miles have you logged, and that
sort of thing.
Yeah, we've been.
We've been spending the last six years building
a different approach to autonomy, and we were
at today as we've been able to demonstrate
that it can do a lot of things that have been
blocking the industry for many years.
It can drive on the kind of equipment that's
on modern vehicles today: single, GPU, computer,
surround cameras, maybe a forward facing radar.
It can drive in different places never been
to before and it can drive different vehicle
types.
So we are very excited to be in the process
of commercializing this technology now, to
see it deployed across the world's most innovative
fleets and vehicle manufacturers and to see
this deployed in a way that can utilize value
quickly and accelerate the growth from assisted
autonomy through to full autonomy.
And so we are.
You know we are in that process right now.
So far, we've been excited to partner with
some of the UK's largest fleets like DPD,
ASDA and Ocado Group and these are large fleets
that do things like grocery delivery here
in the UK and those partnerships have been
wonderful.
We've been delivering groceries throughout
this year with our partners, as, for example,
in London, at showing some of the value that
this autonomy, this autonomy technology, can
bring to society.
Yeah, just on that.
I imagine you still have a safety driver in
the car.
How is the regulation?
I don't want to get lost in that regulation
discussion, but how are you managing to operate?
As you know, crews in California run into
all kinds of trouble, but how is the regulatory
environment allowing you to operate fleets,
for example?
Yeah, that's a really important question.
So today we operate with safety operators,
but we have a two-pronged approach here.
The first is that we want to see the ability
to build value and see deployment of the system
still as a driver assistance system or with
safety operators, as you say and there's extraordinary
value that can be brought there, whether it's
the helping, support, safety or improving
the efficiency of operating vehicles.
There's a big opportunity there that we can
see today through driver assistance.
But then, on the other hand, of course, ultimately
we want to get to level four autonomous driving
at scale and we've been really excited about
the work that we've done with regulators around
the world, but most specifically here in the
UK.
We've had a number of UK ministers for rides
to show them the technology firsthand.
We've sponsored the UK's parliamentary working
group on autonomous driving technology and
we've helped support bringing legislation
to be considered to make this technology legal.
And we've been offered, and are working on,
a 1.9 million pound grant with the government
to help understand and put forward a safety
framework for AI systems.
There's many more activities that we've been
doing in the space, but we're deeply engaged
with regulators and believe that empowering
regulators to understand AI technology and
to yeah, empowering them to understand it
and to be thoughtful about how best to manage
those risks is the best way forward.
So we've really looked into our part on that
front and have been excited about the results
of the traction I should say.
Yeah, can you?
I have questions about the compute intensity
of this and the amount of training data.
But setting that aside for a minute, mercedes-benz
has, I think, a level four autonomy in Germany,
if I'm not mistaken, and the regulations there
allow them to drive hands free on certain
roads and that sort of thing.
How is that system working and how does that
compare to a guy of one?
And yeah, answer that first and then on.
So my understanding is that I haven't seen
a level four system from Mercedes-Benz or
other automotive manufacturers outside of
the trials we've seen in China or in some
parts of the US with some of the technology
companies.
I have seen a limited level three system,
which is where the vehicle does take control
and liability of the vehicle for certain scenarios
and I believe Mercedes have a product that
allows you to do this at low speeds on a highway
in rush hour traffic.
But in general, the automotive industry is
very we get to see as an automotive industry.
We get to see technology at scale which can
do productionize, which can do driving any
vehicle anywhere, whether it's not just highway
at low speeds, but urban, suburban, different
cities around the world, and that's very much
what we're interested in solving.
We want to build an AI driver, an artificial
intelligence system that has the onboard intelligence
to drive vehicles through all of the kinds
of scenarios that we expect in our daily lives
and the commutes and the travel that we do.
We want to build this kind of technology to
help assist people, to free up their time,
to make it safer on the roads, to give them
a more sustainable drive.
All of these kinds of benefits.
We want to ensure this technology can be brought
out quickly and broadly.
We think that this is a unique opportunity
in space and something that of course the
world.
Yeah, I think it's a really important next
evolution that we need to be able to deliver,
to lift up, quite frankly, the safety and
performance of all of the cars that we're
putting on the road today.
Yeah, and for training this system.
I mean, one of the challenges, as I understand
it, of other autonomous vehicle control systems
is they depend very heavily on supervised
learning and you have to label enormous amounts
of data so that the system recognizes corner
cases and there's this very long tail of those
cases.
And, for example, you can train a car to drive
in California, but if you take it to Norway
or something with a vastly different climate,
it's going to run into trouble if the snow
hasn't been labeled into the system and that
sort of thing.
How much?
How do you train Gaia and can it generalize
across environments in real time, or do you
need to train it in advance for every kind
of environment?
The interesting thing is that when you are
driving, you're generalizing all the time.
You will never see the same thing twice on
the road.
Every time you go driving, the weather is
going to be slightly different than you've
ever seen before.
You can have cars and other agents around
you in different locations.
So even if you're on the same road that you've
driven you're commuted every day of your life
that the specific things that you go through
will be different in some way from what you've
seen before.
So I guess the first point to make is that
autonomous driving is all about being able
to generalize.
We do it every time we operate these vehicles
on the road.
The question is how far can you generalize?
It's one thing to generalize driving on the
same road every day.
It's another to drive on one road in the UK
and then be able to drive in the US, where
you have new things like four-way stop signs,
right turn at red, other local driving cultures,
and so we want to build a system that can
effortlessly generalize to new environments
to allow us to bring it to everyone around
the world.
And how we've done that is that our system
is trained through unsupervised learning,
so it doesn't need boxes drawn around objects
or things labeled in the scene for us to learn
how to understand the scene.
It's all unsupervised.
We watch driving data and learn from that
how the world works, learn how to predict
the future, train models like Gaia and these
kinds of things.
So it's all through unsupervised learning,
and the key thing is that it becomes more
efficient the more data you get.
So we might need a certain amount of data
to train in the UK, for us to train a system
and for us to generalize a system to another
environment like the US.
We will need a fraction of that data because
a lot of the experience is shared.
Right, the same rules of physics apply in
both countries.
People tend to behave in a similar way, although
there are some differences.
You need a little bit more data.
We found that going from a passenger vehicle
to a van, for example, generalizing to a different
vehicle, going from a Jaguar I-Pace passenger
vehicle to a 3.5 tonne delivery van, that
took us about 2% to 3% of the training data
to be able to achieve similar level of performance
on the van, and so generalization with N-Twin
neural networks can be very efficient.
It's like large language models learning to
generalize from English to German, to French,
to Mandarin, to other languages, and so those
are some of the things that we think about
when we look to scale our technology and generalize
it to new driving scenarios.
And what about the computer required to train
the models and then to operate the models?
And do the models operate through a connection
to the cloud, or is there a GPU running in
the vehicle?
Yeah, so we don't train.
The models live in the car.
They are safety assured, validated, before
they're deployed on the car.
Rather, we take the experience we get driving
all the time and we feed that back to the
cloud in order to improve the new models that
we'll be validating and deploying.
So it's all trained at scale and we've been
partnered for many years with our great friends
Microsoft, and we work with Azure to be able
to train at scale.
Azure has been able to provide us with extraordinary
compute power but, more importantly, the innovation
that you need to be able to train these kinds
of models.
The tough thing with training video scale
foundation models, like we do, is the data
requirements.
I talked about the size of the input set into
these models.
It's truly ginormous.
And to train on this kind of data, you can't
have it all sitting on the local cloud.
It's tens of petabytes, maybe hundreds of
petabytes, since you need to be able to stream
it to your GPUs.
This means you need a different set of infrastructure
from when you're training a large language
model.
You can't have your data stored locally on
the GPUs.
You need to be able to stream it from storage
that you can do fairly random access across,
and that's quite a hard infrastructure challenge.
So we've been thrilled to be able to do a
lot of pioneering work in this space and we've
been able to do a lot of work in the space
with Microsoft to make it possible to train
models at this scale.
And is that, in order to get the video into
a, do you vectorize it in order to tokenize
it, or how does that work?
Yeah, we take the video data or the experience
for all kinds of data and, yep, it's tokenized,
it's fed into the transformers at scale and
that's how it's trained and it's not just
video data, it's also the navigation prompt,
it's the other robot sensors like GPS, wheel
speeds, things like this.
All these kinds of input data we use and feed
into the AI.
Yeah, I mean.
The reason I'm asking about the computer requirements
is that these large language models are amazing.
They're people that are scaling them 10 times
or more from what we've seen so far.
But there's a limit in the availability of
GPUs for the time being and for the foreseeable
not the foreseeable future, but for at least
a few years.
And then, because of that constraint, there's
a limit on the amount of inference.
Anyone, a customer, can use the model for
these rate limits.
Does a world model face those same constraints?
Sorry, Craig, can you clarify your question?
Constraints around rate limits?
Yeah, just on the availability of GPUs both
for training and for inference, because it
costs an enormous amount of money to train
an LLM, but it also costs an enormous amount
of money on the inference side and people
are accessing these models through APIs and
because of the costs and the compute constraints
they can only process so many requests a minute
or so many tokens a minute and that is really
limiting the enterprise scale applications.
So does that same kind of problem run through
a world model?
Or is a world model less fundamentally less
compute intensive and so you can get around
those problems?
Well, the great thing about our space is that
at inference time, most of the compute runs
on the car and so, assuming you've got vehicle
assets to deploy on that are there and fleets
and are generating value, then you're in a
great spot because you can run all the inferences
you need on the vehicles themselves.
So our challenge is really training time.
Yes, there's some inference costs, but it's
more manageable because it's a hybrid-edge
cloud model and primarily you need to have
most of it on the car because the car should
be able to have all the intelligence it needs
to be safe and make the kind of decisions
it needs to operate in an environment on board
the vehicle.
So training time really matters.
And there, yeah, I mean we are hungry for
all of the compute and data storage that we
can get to be able to power these models,
and I feel fortunate to be writing Moore's
Law and other year-on-year improvement curves
that just bring down the cost and increase
the availability of increasing orders of magnitudes
of these systems.
But no, we certainly do have an appetite to
lift what we've got another 100x to next year
in terms of scale of data and compute and
parameters in this model.
Training computers is a really, really important
factor for us.
Okay, then quickly, two questions.
Is Gaia open source?
And I've been writing a lot about why we don't
see humanoid robots the way everyone wants
to see, and one of the you know they're the
hardware problems, but the other problem is
having a reliable AI brain.
Could this model be applied to other forms
of embodied AI robots?
That's an awesome question.
I'm really bullish on humanoid robotics being
a part of the future, the technology we're
building.
We want to see this kind of embodied AI system
empower all kinds of robots, whether it's
manufacturing domestic robots or self-driving
cars.
But I agree with you.
I think self-driving cars will be the first
big application of embodied AI at scale, because
there is data, there are hardware platforms,
there is a business case and so it can be
built.
Today, I think getting the data and the hardware
platforms for humanoid robotics is is harder,
but I hope that the scale of embodied AI we
can build through self-driving can make that
easier by taking that technology and adapting
it to humanoid robotics in the future, and
I would love for Wave to be part of that.
Once we've got our self-driving embodied AI
systems to scale.
That's really the path we see.
So I agree with you on that one, but I'm very
bullish on in 10 years time, ai not just being
chatbots and co-pilots but being all kinds
of physical embodied AI systems in the world
that we live in.
Okay, and then the question on open source.
Is Gaia open source?
So, gaia, we have written an extensive research
paper around it, and we're very much fans
of openly engaging with the AI community and
sharing ideas.
We haven't open sourced the model itself for
now, and that's something that we continue
to iterate on and develop internally and to
use to deploy on our fleets with our partners.
Hi, I wanted to jump in and give a shout out
to our sponsor, netsuite by Oracle.
I'm a journalist and getting a single source
of truth is nearly impossible.
If you're a business owner, having a single
source of truth is critical to running your
operations.
If this is you, you should know these three
numbers 36,000, 25,1.
36,000, because that's the number of businesses
that have upgraded to NetSuite by Oracle.
Netsuite is the number one cloud financial
system streamlining accounting, financial
management, inventory, hr and more.
25, because NetSuite turns 25 this year.
That's 25 years of helping businesses do more
with less, close their books in days, not
weeks, and drive down costs.
One because your business is one of a kind,
so you get a customized solution for all of
your KPIs in one efficient system with one
source of truth: Manage risk, get reliable
forecast and improve margins Everything you
need all in one place.
As I said, I'm not the most organized person
in the world and there's real power to having
all of the information in one place to make
better decisions.
This is an unprecedented offer by NetSuite
to make that possible Right now.
Download NetSuite's popular KPI checklist,
designed to give you consistently excellent
performance, absolutely free, at netsuitecom.
Slash I on AI.
That's Eye on AI E-Y-E-O-N-A-I all run together.
Go to netsuite.com, slash I on AI, to get
your own KPI checklist.
They support us, so let's support them.
That's it for this episode.
I want to thank Alex for his time.
If you want to learn more about the conversation
we had today, you can find a transcript on
our website.
I'm on AI . That's E-Y-E-O-N-A-I Remember.
The singularity may not be near, but AI is
changing your world, so pay attention.